# Firewall

#### What is a firewall?
>Firewall is a network security system, that monitors and controls inbound and outbound network traffic based on pre-configured rules.

#### Types of firewall
1. Packet filtering firewall (L3/L$: Based on IP and ports)
2. proxy firewall (Acts between client and server, also understands application data like HTTP, FTP)
3. Stateful Inspection firewall (Keeps tracks of connection between client and server)
4. Next Generation firewall (Combines: Stateful inspection, application awareness, deep packet inspection, IPS )
5. Circuit Level gateway (L5: At session layer, monitors TCP handshakes but does not inspect payload)
6. Web application firewall (L7: Firewall for web apps, blocks SQLi, XSS attacks ,and other malicious requests)
7. Host based firewall (Runs on single device, like personal computer)
8. Network based firewall (Positioned outside a network gateway, e.g. Cisco ASA)

Linux: iptables/ **nftables**
macOS: pf firewall
Windows: Windows defender firewall

#### Linux
netfilter: Built in kernel framework for packet filtering, NAT, connection tracking
iptables/ nftables: adds configuration to netfilter. i.e: rules

##### Packets pass through defined hooks:
###### Forward path
NIC => PREROUTING -> routing -> Forward -> POSTROUTING> => NIC
###### INPUT path
NIC => PREROUTING -> routing -> INPUT => local process
###### OUTPUT path
local process => OUTPUT -> routing -> POSTROUTING => NIC


>PREROUTING is the first hook after a packet enters the system, before routing decision. It is commonly used for DNAT and early packet mangling
>INPUT is a sequence of rules executed on the packet
>OUTPUT processes packets generated by local applications before they leave the machine.
>POSTROUTING is the last hook before a packet leaves the system, commonly used for SNAT/MASQUERADE and final modifications.
>FORWARD processes packets that are routed through the machine (not destined for it), allowing the system to act as a router.

#### Packet decisions
1. ACCEPT
2. DROP
3. REJECT
#### Flow control
1. RETURN
2. JUMP
#### Modifications
1. NAT
2. MARK
3. REDIRECT
4. MANGLE
#### Connection states
1. NEW
2. ESTABLISHED
3. RELATED
4. INVALID
#### Others
1. Log
2. Queue
3. Packet mangling
4. TTL modification

>Example
>iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 22 -j DROP
>Using iptables to add rules to netfilter
>Add a rule to the INPUT chain: if a packet is TCP and destination port is 22 (SSH), drop it.
